#### Introduction

Good morning to all. It gives me immense joy to be amidst you today. 

A few lines to introduce myself. I passed out of this college in the year 2005 and I did my Compute Science degree here. I got a job in TCS by campus placement, worked for 4 years there. And then a friend of mine introduced ThoughtWorks to me. Working in ThoughtWorks was a life changing experience and I should say it completely changed my perspective about work, made me rediscover my potential and it helped me land my next dream job in a startup. Startups are all craze today where you work on an idea and the amount of work/energy you put in your entire career is compressed to a few years. And yes it's been an amazing journey till here. Right now I am working with 3 friends of mine to build my own company which is based on a idea to use technology to improve education in school. And I am really excited about it!

Now friends, coming back to what I really wanted to say to you today. I asked myself things I wish I had known when I was about to step out of this college. The important lessons I have learnt in the past 10 years and the days where i really thought "man a little heads up from someone would have helped!". Now I had consciously made a choice to get industry exposure as early as possible instead of pursuing higher studies. So things I say might resonate more with folks here who have similar aspirations.

I wanted to share 3 thoughts with you today that I believe would be really helpful before you step out of college into your next phase of life:

### What you learn in college is always relevant

During study holidays, we all used to do these long group study sessions at night. The more closer we get to the exams, the more intense the discussions become! And there is always one person in the group who says "why am I studying all this! To fill up content for 2 pages in tomorrow's answer sheet and then forget it!" Well the answer depends on what/how you are studying. I am really not talking about preparing during those days to ace those papers and boost your GPA. 

But there will be concepts that are timeless and you should learn them for the sake of appreciating them. I mean in technology there are only problems and solutions. One brilliant mind while working on something hit a roadblock and she devised a solution to tackle that. And others improvised her solution and now here it is in all it's grandeur and beauty. You should get into the inventor's mind to appreciate it. I can give you a million examples of how I was able to relate to what I learnt at college to my day-to-day work. To really quote some:

* I had to setup the entire  network infrastructure for our new company. I had to procure routes, switches and work with ISP providers. Setting up ip address range, Subnet Mask, DHCP setup, rate limiting, DNS resolution and what not. Thank you Andrew S Tanenbaum :)

* We use docker now to deploy applications to production everyday. I had few hours to learn how docker really works and then deploy it on the ubuntu bare machines we had in our data centers. Linux containers and operating system virtualization might look like fancy words when you hear them, but mostly all of them are extensions to ideas you would read in your operating systems book. We used to read that Silberchatz book with weird dinosaurs, not sure what you have now! :)

In the interest of time, I am moving on to my next point. But trust me when I say it, what you learn here lay the basic foundations for the concepts you learn at work and you will only keep adding building blocks on top of them all the time! 

### Do not underestimate your skills. Dream big!

When I was in college, my friends would generally acknowledge me as a good techie and I would ace my practicals pretty well, theory was a different story and I think I would attribute that to my handwriting. Also, when it came to attending symposiums and other technical events, I would pair with a senior or someone and always crack coding contests. I knew I was good at programming, but not sure if I really could work in the googles and microsofts then! I was content to get placed in the first company that visited us and the typical complacency that most of us get in the final year after we get placed, well, I joined that club too. Looking back, I am not saying TCS was a bad company to join. I worked mostly at the customer's place in US and I was fortunate to work with some great minds and I learnt a lot. But, when I came out of TCS and joined ThoughtWorks, it was like a realization. Looking at the culture, the way work was done and knowledge was shared, it matched more with my own personal convictions and I wish I had joined that company straight out of college. Now what made me not do that!? 

I could have still applied directly to ThoughtWorks when I was in college and mostly I would have been through. But I did not even care to apply coz I was not worried about the culture, my growth inside the company and how things would be 5 years down the line. There are these 4 quadrants of knowledge, what we know we know, what we know we don't know, what we don't know we know and what we don't know we don't know. Now the last quadrant is the worst place to be. You need to enlighten yourself about the ground reality and the world out there. Talk to your seniors, to folks who are already in the industry and read a lot. I can recommend a couple of resources right away.. read hacker news, participate in online communities like stack overflow and try to find answers to questions asked and improve your score. and participate in coding contests. I am not talking about topcoder. Sites like geektrust and hackerearth! You submit solutions to problems and they actually get you in touch with companies based on how good you are! Geektrust is actually run by a friend of mine, a ex-colleague and I am pretty sure you are in good hands! So compared to the platforms and opportunities we had 10 years ago, you have plentiful now and all you have to do is "show up and participate"

### There are no GPAs after college

I mean when you are in college, there is a course map designed for you. You have labs to practise what you learn theoretically and then there are exams to measure your progress, though I must say the evaluation methodologies can be debated about. But heck you have yardscale to say where you are!

Now when you are out of college, there are no GPAs after this. You get the point right!? You don't have to live by rules, you are answerable to no one, no mid-semester exams, no external evaluators to worry about and dread their viva voce questions! 

Well that's the point. In real life, there is no one to tell you if you have subscribed yourself to the right courses and if you are on the right track! Of course, you will find mentors at the jobs you take, there will be year end appraisal meetings where they will rate you based on your performance. But remember these processes are in place to help the company grow and to make you work at your peak potential. There are no altruistic motives there where someone really cares about your growth and wellbeing. The truth is you are on your own! And that's a double edged sword. In your career path, find people who are achievers or super stars, for example, if your dream is to become an entrepreneur, try to emulate folks who have gone big in India like Sachin bansal (flipkart) or Rahul Yadav (prev housing.com). Of if you really want to be a good programmer, open github.com and find the top rankers in your country and it will give a good idea of what technologies they are learning and working on. Now you have a course map and on a monthyl basis, compare your previous self and see how you are growing up! And that to me is a more practical way to compare yourself and measure your progress!

Cool! Thanks for your time listening to me thus far. And I thank Sathiyamurthy sir for giving me this wonderful opportunity to meet you all. I wish you all the very best!
